1. If you boot into the suspects machine and attempt to use it normally, it goes into a ‘threat detected’ mode and starts erasing data. You need to boot the machine into a safe mode or analyze the machine using a dead analysis in order to avoid this problem. See the evidence file 1-A.png for a screenshot of the machine behavior on a normal live boot.

2. The suspect uses Ubuntu 9.04. We can when we attempt a live boot by looking at the boot options, or we can see this from the dead analysis by viewing the file /etc/lsb-release which tells us we are using Ubuntu 9.04 Jaunty. See the file 2-A.png for a screenshot of the live boot output and the evidence file 2-B.txt for a copy of /etc/lsb-release.

3. The suspect uses the name nefarious as his Linux login. We can tell by examining the file system in the /home/ directory. A screenshot of the contents of the /home/ directory is shown in 3-A.png. In the screenshot we can see that the directory has an entry for nefarious.

4. There is evidence that there was an accomplice on the night of the crime. He appears to be the getaway driver for the crime. There are IRC chat logs showing a conversation between our suspect nefarious and an individual accomplice on Nov 25, 01:54:24 2009. The contents of the IRC chat log file can be found in evidence file 4-A.txt. The file can be found in the Ubuntu filesystem at /home/nefarious/irclogs/freenode/#planning.log. In the chat log, the accomplice expresses concern about the security of the communication channel. The suspect tells the accomplice not to worry, and that they will need to make a fast getaway. The accomplice says he will be waiting outside ‘that dough building’ at 3:15 AM. The dough building in question is likely the Herbert H. Dow Building at the University of Michigan. The pair agree to meet and the suspect leaves the chat saying he needs to prepare.

5. The machine had one particularly suspicious encrypted file worth noting. In the /home/nefarious directory, there was a password protected zip file called passwords.zip. This file is provided in the evidence folder as 5-A.zip. Additionally, the same directory had deleted files password3.txt, password4.txt, and password5.txt. These files could not be directly recovered however.
The passwords.zip file was then decrypted using the Unix password cracker John the Ripper. The password file was converted from a zip file to a john file with the tool zip2john. Then the john tool was used to crack the password. Output of the john tool is given in 5-B.png, and shows that the password to the zip file was ‘soelite’.
The contents of the zip file are five text files with five secret passwords - ‘enigma’, ‘love’, ‘supersecret’, ‘KERMIT’, and ‘eeMeisei700x’. The contents of the files are give in the evidence folder as 5-C.txt, 5-D.txt, 5-E.txt, 5-F.txt,  and 5-G.txt.

6. There is evidence that the suspect was researching nerf guns before the murder. Upon doing an ASCII keyword search across the disk for the keyword ‘nerf’, we can find a few log files as well as specific HTTP requests showing Google and Amazon searches for various kinds of nerf guns. These files can be found in evidence as 6-A.txt - 6-F.txt. In particular, 6-D.txt shows a discussion of the nerf blaster, the same kind used in the crime.

7. The suspect attempted to delete a few different files on this machine. As mentioned above, the suspect attempted to delete password3.txt, password4.txt, and password5.txt files from the /home/nefarious directory. Fortunately, the passwords.zip file contained these text files and was able to be decrypted. See part 5 for details.
More importantly, the suspect deleted evil_plan.bmp from the /home/nefarious/Documents directory. You can see a capture of this deleted file in the Documents folder in evidence file 7-A.png. We were able to recover this file, which turns out to be an image file showing the suspect’s evil plan. The image is a poorly done drawing with the title ‘THE PLAN’, showing the attacker shooting a nerf blaster at a figure labeled ‘HAPLESS VICTIM’ and saying ‘HA HA’. The figure also notes that the victim is seated at theTABLES’ with an arrow indicating the tables. It is really quite a terrible drawing. In the evidence locker, we have presented a screenshot of the bitmap when rendered in image form as 7-B.png. We have also included the raw data scraped from the disk as 7-C.raw.
Finally, we found a partial history of the suspect’s deleted bash commands. At fragment 886793 there is a block of commands that shows the suspect configuring Hydra and breaking into an ssh server at 141.212.111.41. We can also see the suspect construct the passwords.zip file, and can see the five passwords in plain text being echoed into the file. If we had not brute forced the zip file, the passwords would surely help the investigation. See 7-D.txt for the ASCII section of the fragment.

8. Timeline:
Nov 25th 1:54:XX: nefarious and accomplice IRC log. Agree to meet in front of Dow (dough) engineering building at 3:15 am for escape
Nov 25th 10:31:35: 141.212.111.41 gains root access to server (done with hydra shown in bash files)
Nov 25th 10:34:35: password for root changed
Nov 25th 10:36:XX: /var/www/index.html modified and defaced
Dec 7th 18:35:14: root access 0.0.0.0
Dec 7th 18:35:26: password change

9. There are other suspicious things about the machine. For one, there is an IP address with no host in the known_hosts file in the /home/nefarious/.ssh folder. Upon request from headquarters, we found that the computer at IP address 141.212.111.42 had permanently moved to 54.237.178.0. This opened up a few more key questions in the investigation which will be explored below. See 9-A.txt for a copy of the contents of known_hosts, showing the IP in question.
We were able to get access to this machine by using Hydra to guess permutations of usernames and passwords fromt the password.txt file. Quickly enough, we found that the machine could be accessed with the username root and the password ‘eeMeisei700x’ from the zip file.

10. According to the files on this machine, the machine is owned by Dr. Academic Researcher. The main owner is named academic and if you access the machine over HTTP you get a webpage about ‘Dr Academic Researcher.’ Evidence files 10-A.png and 10-B.html show these observations. It should also be noted that the HTML file that is returned also has a hidden and cryptic comment - ‘The duck flies at midnight!’ This comment could be a secret message to the suspect’s accomplice.

11. The purpose of this server appears to have originally to host an Apache website for Academic Researcher. In the /var/log folder we can see aptitude installation logs that show that the computer is configured with Apache (11-A.txt). The website has been compromised however, and changed by the suspect.

12. The suspect was not granted access to the machine - the machine was compromised. The evidence file 7-A.png mentioned above shows the suspect installing Hydra and successfully executing an SSH attack on the server. The suspect gains root access this way, by guessing passwords over the course of a few hours. The authentication logs can be found in var/log/auth.log, shown in evidence file 12-A.txt. In this file, we can see repeated attempts at guessing the password. Then at Nov 25 10:31:35, we see the message ‘Accepted password for root from 141.212.111.41 port 39529 ssh2’ showing the suspect gained access to the machine. He then changes the password for root immediately after as well as on December 7th.

13. The suspect messed with the index page of Dr. Academic Researcher’s site. Mentioned briefly above, nefarious changes the HTML to say that ‘Dr. Academic Researcher is a loser who knows nothing about computer security.’ Additionally, he puts a secret message in a comment within the HTML, saying ‘The duck flies at midnight!’ which is also suspicious. A screenshot of the rendered HTML page is shown in 13-A.png.

14. To remedy the abuse of the index.html page it was modified with a more pleasant message
